sig-node: Kubelet-in-UserNS, aka Rootless mode (#1371)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/2033-rootless/README.md

#### Story 2: HPC cluster

A user wants to deploy a Kubernetes cluster using shared HPC machines to run scientific research workloads.

However, the machine administrator does not want to allow the user to gain the root privileges,
because the admin thinks that the user may accidentally break other users' environments.

And yet, the admin hesitates to deploy a shared Kubernetes cluster and to create RBAC-restricted
accounts for users, because user management in Kubernetes is very difficult.

The user would want this KEP to be implemented so that he/she can deploy Kubernetes without
convincing the admin.

#### Story 3: `kind` with Rootless Docker/Podman

A user wants to run a test cluster inside Docker/Podman on his/her laptop using `kind`.

However, the user doesn't want Kubernetes/kind/Docker/Podman to gain the root privileges
because these components may accidentally break the host environment,
e.g. Docker may modify the host iptables in an unexpected way and break the user's VPN connectivity.

The user would want this KEP to be implemented so that he/she could run `kind` with Rootless Docker/Podman,

> which won't break the host.

Reviewer: Ack

> which won't break the host.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda please add this story

```
#### Story 4: control-plane in kubeadm as non-root

[KEP-2568: Run control-plane as non-root in kubeadm](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/2568-kubeadm-non-root-control-plane) is starting down the path of is it possible to avoid common container escapes from control plane components. This spotlights the need for Rootless mode feature especially when these are temporarily created and used to bootstrap an actual cluster in a cloud provider (say using cluster-api)

```

> which won't break the host.

Author: I'm confused. The linked [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/2568-kubeadm-non-root-control-plane) says `Run node components as non-root in kubeadm` is a non-goal.

> which won't break the host.

Author: Maybe, can we call it `#### Story 4: temporary initial cluster for bootstrapping actual cluster`?

> which won't break the host.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda sounds good.

> which won't break the host.

Author: ```md
#### Story 4: Temporary initial cluster for bootstrapping

A user needs a temporary initial cluster to bootstrap an actual cluster with Cluster API.

The user wants to avoid having the root privileges.
```

> which won't break the host.

Reviewer 2: just a note because I miss the context of the conversation, kind runs kubeadm under the hood, don't know how this applies here

- Limited network performance due to the slirp4netns overhead.
  **Mitigation:** Install [`lxc-user-nic` (SETUID binary)](https://github.com/rootless-containers/rootlesskit/blob/v0.14.0-beta.0/docs/network.md#--netlxc-user-nic-experimental).
- NodePort less than 1024 cannot be exposed. This is not a problem with the default `--service-node-port-range` configuration (30000-32767).
  **Mitigation:** set `CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE` file capability on `rootlesskit` binary.

Volumes:
- Block device volumes and (kernel-mode) NFS does not work, because user namespace only supports `tmpfs`, `bind`, and FUSE filesystems.
  `emptyDir`, `hostPath`, `local`, and API volumes (`configMap`, `secret`, `downwardAPI`, ...) are known to work without any issue.
  FUSE-based CSI volumes can be supported as well.
  **Mitigation:** Implement CSI plugins for FUSE implementation of NFS. Or implement a "proxy" CSI plugin that talks to a privileged CSI plugin daemon.

SecurityContext:
- A container with `securityContext.privileged` cannot gain the real root privileges, obviously.
- `runAsUser`: supported, but the number of the UID is limited by `/etc/subuid`.

> - `sysctls`: some sysctl parameters are supported, but some would fail in `EPERM`.

Reviewer 3: Do we have a list of sysctls? (I think overall we would need a comprehensive document that captures what works and what doesn't for rootless.)

Author: Kernel should provide the list, but I don't think we have the list.
Basically, sysctl that do not result in container breakout are allowed, and others are disallowed.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda ACK, we could use the alpha->beta to figure out what kernels things fail for which sysctl params.

Author: RHEL has been officially supporting Rootless Podman since RHEL 8.1, and it has exactly same restriction as this KEP, but I don't see the list of supported sysctls in RHEL documentation 

https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/building_running_and_managing_containers/starting-with-containers_building-running-and-managing-containers#special_considerations_for_rootless

Author: I guess the list of userns-scoped sysctls can be tracked in https://rootlesscontaine.rs/ (or eventually in kernel documentation).
Opened issue https://github.com/rootless-containers/rootlesscontaine.rs/issues/34 .

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

This feature is new, there is no upgrade path from existing nodes.

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.

> -->

Reviewer: +1 to update to reflect this

> -->

Author: Changed to N/A

- Kernel: 5.2 or later is recommended. At least 4.15 or later is required. ([Reason](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/blob/master/docs/cgroup-v2.md#host-requirements))
- Systemd: 244 or later is recommended.
- CRI: containerd 1.4 or later is required. CRI-O doesn't support rootless cgroup2 yet.

> - OCI: runc 1.0-rc91 or crun 0.14 is recommended.

Reviewer: yes, @AkihiroSuda, please switch to `Containerd v1.5.0` and `runc rc93` ( we can bump to 1.5.1 later which will bring in runc rc94)

> - OCI: runc 1.0-rc91 or crun 0.14 is recommended.

Author: The requirement for containerd is >= 1.4, not >= 1.5.

> - OCI: runc 1.0-rc91 or crun 0.14 is recommended.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda Ack then let us say a "minimum version / at least" in the sentence.

> - OCI: runc 1.0-rc91 or crun 0.14 is recommended.

Author: Updated as follows

```md
### Dependencies

- Kernel: 5.2 or later is recommended. At least 4.15 or later is required. ([Reason](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/blob/master/docs/cgroup-v2.m
d#host-requirements))
- Systemd: 244 or later is recommended.
- CRI: containerd >= 1.4, or CRI-O >= 1.22 is required.
- OCI: runc >= 1.0-rc91 is required. runc >= 1.0-rc93 is recommended. crun works, too.
```

production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/20190731-production-readiness-review-process.md.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed for features in
v1.19 or later, but is non-blocking at this time. That is, approval is not
required in order to be in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - [X] Other

>     - Describe the mechanism: By running kubelet and kube-proxy in a user namespace created by RootlessKit.

Reviewer: +1 to feature flag @ehashman @AkihiroSuda

>     - Describe the mechanism: By running kubelet and kube-proxy in a user namespace created by RootlessKit.

Author: Running kubelet in a user namespace (i.e. rootless) is already opt-in, and rootful users are not affected by the kubelet changes (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/92863), so I'm not sure a feature gate is really needed. 
Avoiding adding a new feature gate would be helpful for kind/minikube/k3d with rootless docker/podman provider.

But if it is really needed, I'm happy to add a feature gate like `KubeletInUserNamespace`.
We could also call it `Rootless`, but `KubeletInUserNamespace` might be less confusing.
(Maybe I could have opened this KEP as "kubelet-in-userNS, aka rootless" 😅 )

>     - Describe the mechanism: By running kubelet and kube-proxy in a user namespace created by RootlessKit.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda +1 to do `KubeletInUserNamespace` please reflect this in the KEP language.

>     - Describe the mechanism: By running kubelet and kube-proxy in a user namespace created by RootlessKit.

Author: Updated
```md
* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`): `KubeletInUserNamespace`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

Enabling `KubeletInUsernamespace` feature gate does not automatically execute kubelet in a user namespace.
The user namespace has to be created by RootlessKit before running kubelet.
For `kind` usecase, the namespace is provided by Rootless Docker or Rootless Podman (they internally use RootlessKit).

Note that this feature gate does not support separating kubelet's user namespace from the user namespace of other
node components such as CRI.
All the node components has to run in the same user namespace.
```

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**

> No.

Reviewer: @AkihiroSuda let's please say, that during Alpha we will document what workloads will work and what will not work.

> No.

Author: Updated
```md
* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**

During Alpha, we will document what workloads will work and what will not work.
```

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**

> Yes, by just switching away to traditional rootful setup.

Reviewer: agree, please update @AkihiroSuda

> Yes, by just switching away to traditional rootful setup.

Author: updated

```md
* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**

N/A, as switching back rootless to rootful requires redeploying the kubelet, and vice versa.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

N/A.
```

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

> It works again.

Reviewer: yep

> It works again.

Author: updated to `N/A`

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**

> Yes, see [Usernetes smoke tests](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20201118.0/.github/workflows/main.yaml).

Reviewer: agree

> Yes, see [Usernetes smoke tests](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20201118.0/.github/workflows/main.yaml).

Author: I think we should run `kind` tests, with Rootless Docker (or Podman) provider

> Yes, see [Usernetes smoke tests](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20201118.0/.github/workflows/main.yaml).

Author: updated

```md
* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**

CI will run `kind` (Kubernetes in Docker) tests with Rootless Docker/Podman.
```

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

> This KEP does not modify Pod specs, so there is no new topic about rolling out, upgrading, or rolling back pod replicas.

Reviewer: +1

> This KEP does not modify Pod specs, so there is no new topic about rolling out, upgrading, or rolling back pod replicas.

Author: Updated to leave it empty

### Monitoring Requirements

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**

> SSH into a node, and see whether kubelet is running as a non-root user.

Reviewer: +1

> SSH into a node, and see whether kubelet is running as a non-root user.

Author: Changed to N/A

* **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine 
the health of the service?**
  - [ ] Metrics
    - Metric name:
    - [Optional] Aggregation method:
    - Components exposing the metric:
  - [X] Other (treat as last resort)
    - Details: Use `systemctl --user is-system-running` to verify whether the processes (RootlessKit, kubelet, kube-proxy, and CRI) are running.

* **What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the above SLIs?**

> 99% of `systemctl --user is-system-running` per day finish without an error.

Reviewer: +1

> 99% of `systemctl --user is-system-running` per day finish without an error.

Author: Changed to N/A

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability 
of this feature?**

> No.

Reviewer 4: Not required for alpha, but I'll mention it now anyway: it'd be useful to have the kubelet publish whether or not it is running rootless, as a boolean metric.

Author: updated
```md

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability 
of this feature?**

N/A, but it'd be useful to have the kubelet publish whether or not it is running rootless, as a boolean metric.
```

      - Impact of its outage on the feature: Outgoing packets will be dropped.
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature: Outgoing packet forwarding will be slow.

### Scalability

_For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them._

_For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions._

_For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field._

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?**

No.
  
* **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?**

No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud 
provider?**

No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of 
the existing API objects?**

No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any 
operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs]?**

No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of 
resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**

No. 

> (RootlessKit and slirp4netns may face high CPU and memory consumption, but these are not Kubernetes components)

Reviewer: +1 to update to reflect this

> (RootlessKit and slirp4netns may face high CPU and memory consumption, but these are not Kubernetes components)

Author: updated

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- 2018-07-20: Early POC implementation in [Usernetes project](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes)
- 2019-04-10: [k3s adopted the Usernetes patches (cgroupless version)](https://github.com/rancher/k3s/pull/195)
- 2019-06-04: [Presented KEP to SIG-node (cgroupless version)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1084)
- 2019-07-08: Withdrew the cgroupless KEP
- 2019-11-19: @giuseppe submitted [cgroup v2 KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1370)
- 2019-11-19: present KEP to SIG-node (cgroup v2 version)
- 2020-07-07: the cgroup v2 support is in `implementable` status

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> The drawback of this KEP is its complicity.

Reviewer: +1 to update to reflect this

> The drawback of this KEP is its complicity.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The primary drawback of this KEP is its complexity.
```

Author: Funny typo :) , thanks

Author: Updated 
```md
The primary drawback of this KEP is its complexity.
It also heavily relies on third-party, out-of-tree components.
```

> The drawback of this KEP is its complicity.

Author: Updated

```md
The primary drawback of this KEP is its complexity.
It also heavily relies on third-party, out-of-tree components.
```

And yet, the admin hesitates to deploy a shared Kubernetes cluster and to create RBAC-restricted
accounts for users, because user management in Kubernetes is very difficult.

The user would want this KEP to be implemented so that he/she can deploy Kubernetes without
convincing the admin.

#### Story 3: `kind` with Rootless Docker/Podman

A user wants to run a test cluster inside Docker/Podman on his/her laptop using `kind`.

However, the user doesn't want Kubernetes/kind/Docker/Podman to gain the root privileges
because these components may accidentally break the host environment,
e.g. Docker may modify the host iptables in an unexpected way and break the user's VPN connectivity.

The user would want this KEP to be implemented so that he/she could run `kind` with Rootless Docker/Podman,
which won't break the host.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

Privileges:
- A container with `securityContext.privileged` cannot gain the real root privileges, obviously.

> cgroup:

Reviewer 5: can you comment on devices?  pids?  swap?  the implication here is the runtime itself is also running rootless too, right?  are there aspects of the host that kubelet monitors today that it cannot monitor?  any exploration of cAdvisor?

Author: > can you comment on devices? pids? swap?

Device controller is not supported for rootless, but it's not a huge deal, as non-root user cannot access most devices anyway. PID controller and memory controller (swap) are supported, as well as CPU and IO controller.

> the implication here is the runtime itself is also running rootless too, right? 

Yes

> are there aspects of the host that kubelet monitors today that it cannot monitor? any exploration of cAdvisor?

Most stuff would work, but we may need to modify cAdvisor to monitor non-standard cgroup path (if cAdvisor doesn't support it yet)

k3s implementation: https://github.com/rancher/k3s/blob/v1.17.2+k3s1/pkg/rootlessports/controller.go#L92-L96

##### RootlessKit network drivers

RootlessKit supports two kinds of network stacks:
* TAP with pure usermode network stack (either `slirp4netns` or VPNKit)
* vEth with setuid binary `lxc-user-nic`

`slirp4netns` is preferred for security, `lxc-user-nic` is preferred for performance.

These stacks are used for the namespace where the node components are executed in, not for the containers' namespaces.
CNI plugins such as Flannel are expected to be used for the containers' namespace.

##### CNI plugins

Flannel (VXLAN) is known to work.

#### Pod SecurityContext

- `runAsUser`: supported, but the number of the UID is limited by `/etc/subuid`.
- `sysctls`: some sysctl parameters are supported, but some would fail in `EPERM`.
  Creating Pod manifests with such sysctl parameters would fail.
  If this behavior is problematic, user should write a Mutating Admission Webhook to remove such sysctl parameters from Pod manifests.
- seccomp: supported

> - AppArmor: unsupported. Creating Pod manifests with AppArmor profile specified would fail.

Reviewer 5: any input around selinux?

Author: Same status as Rootless Podman. i.e. Applying an existing profile would be ok, but creating a new profile would not.

#### Required changes to Kubernetes
`kubelet` needs to be updated to ignore errors during [`setupKernelTunables()`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.19.0-beta.2/pkg/kubelet/cm/container_manager_linux.go#L389-L428),
because some of sysctl parameters cannot be modified in the user namespace, and modifying them is not mandatory.

> **Note**
> These sysctl parameters are set by `kubelet` itself and unrelated to `.spec.securityContext.sysctls` in Pod manifests.

Same applies to the `setRLimit()` and the conntrack stuff in `kube-proxy`.

**Patches**
- [kubelet/cm: ignore sysctl error when running in userns](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20200701.0/src/patches/kubernetes/0001-kubelet-cm-ignore-sysctl-error-when-running-in-usern.patch)
- [kube-proxy: allow running in userns](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20200701.0/src/patches/kubernetes/0002-kube-proxy-allow-running-in-userns.patch)

### cgroup

[cgroup v2](../20191118-cgroups-v2.md) and systemd are required. cgroup v1 won't be supported due to security concerns.

containerd supports cgroup v2 for rootless since containerd v1.4.

#### Required changes to Kubernetes

> `pkg/kubelet/cm` needs to be updated to set `PodConfig.Linux.CgroupParent` to `"user.slice"` so that CRI/OCI can talk to the user instance of systemd.

Reviewer 5: is the qos tree changed?
can you describe how /kubepods/{burstable|besteffort} hierarchy is captured?

Author: Please see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1371#discussion_r523939873

Author: Updated KEP to support cgroupsPerQos

A container is executed in a cgroup like "/user.slice/user-1001.slice/user@1001.service/user.slice/cri-containerd-6938564e754ad86269a536ed19172af0eff5f7ff0a41eefc5b433a76f1f38f16.scope".

This feature will be enabled via a boolean field `Rootless` in `KubeletConfiguration`, which will be gated by the `Rootless` feature gate.

**Example kubelet config**
```yaml
kind: KubeletConfiguration
apiVersion: kubelet.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
...
featureGates:
  Rootless: true
rootless: true
cgroupDriver: systemd
cgroupsPerQOS: false
```

**Patches**
- [kubelet: new feature gate: Rootless](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20200701.0/src/patches/kubernetes/0004-kubelet-new-feature-gate-Rootless.patch)

> `cgroupsPerQOS` is currently unsupported.

Reviewer 5: why is it not supported?

Author: This is because the current patch depends on systemd API, which does not create an arbitrary name of cgroup such as kubepods/{burstable|besteffort}.

But on second thought, it might be possible to just use cgroupfs driver within a custom cgroup root which is created by calling systemd API. In that way, we would be able to create kubepods/{burstable|besteffort}.

I'll try some experiments.

Author: Seems to work: https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/pull/200

I'll update this KEP later.

Author: Updated KEP to support cgroupsPerQos

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> This KEP allows running the entire Kubernetes components (`kubelet`, CRI, OCI, CNI, and all `kube-*`) as a non-root user on the host,

Author: Added `See [Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats) for the caveats.`

by running them in a user namespace.

> **TLDR**: Most things do work without modifying Kubernetes. But we need to modify a just few lines of kubelet and kube-proxy to ignore errors during setting some sysctl and rlimit values.

Author: I don't see restrictions that are specific to static pods.

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

* Protect the host from potential container-breakout vulnerabilities. This is the main movation.
* Allow users of shared machines (especially HPC) to run Kubernetes without the risk of accidentally breaking their colleagues' environments.
  Not recommended for real multi-tenancy where the users cannot be trusted.
  * Safe [`kind`](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/): Kubernetes inside Rootless Docker/Podman.
  * Safe Kubernetes-on-Kubernetes, to isolate workloads more strictly than Kubernetes API namespaces.

### FAQ: why not use admission controllers?
Admission controllers like PSP can restrict containers to use extra security options like AppArmor/SELinux, gVisor/Kata, and also potentially [Node-level UserNS](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/127) in future.

> However, these are not efficient to mitigate vulnerabilities of the node components themselves (kubelet, CRI, OCI...).

Author: Added `See [Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats) for the caveats.`

> However, these are not efficient to mitigate vulnerabilities of the node components themselves (kubelet, CRI, OCI...).

Author: I indent to cover that in `[Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats)`. Please let me know if something is missing.

While Node-level UserNS executes only containers inside UserNS. this KEP executes all the node components inside UserNS to mitigate vulnerabilities of all components,

Node-level UserNS and this KEP do not conflict and can be stacked together. (Node-level UserNS inside Kubelet's UserNS.)

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1: Production cluster

A user is scared of the past vulnerabilities of kubelet/CRI/OCI, and looking for a way to
mitigate such potential vulnerabilities.

So the user would want this KEP to be implemented.

> The user may face difficulties for deploying stateful workloads because block-based and NFS-based persistent volumes

Author: OOMwatcher does not work when rootless dmesg is disabled with `kernel.dmesg_restrict=1`

mostly do not work (see [Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats)), but this is not a huge deal,
when the user can use managed object storages such as Amazon S3, or managed RDBs such as Amazon RDS for storing persistent data.

> If the user really needs to run an application that requires the root privileges, the user

Author: Added `However, it is more preferrable to create another cluster for rootful nodes.`

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

If Linux kernel had vulnerabilities in its user namespace implementation, the root in the user namespace might be able to
escape from the user namespace, and take the real root privilege of the host.

So, it is still preferred to run pods with sandbox technologies like gVisor to mitigate potential kernel vulnerabilities.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Running Kubernetes inside Rootless Docker/Podman (kind, minikube)

> When Kubernetes is being executed inside Rootless Docker/Podman, the namespaces and cgroups are already configured by Docker/Podman.

Author: I'm not talking about bringing that back.

I'm just talking about all the node components such as kubelet, kube-proxy, CRI, and CNI in the same namespaces in a rootless container.

i.e., just running `kind create cluster` with rootless docker or rootless podman.

> When Kubernetes is being executed inside Rootless Docker/Podman, the namespaces and cgroups are already configured by Docker/Podman.

Author: Updated for clarity.

```md
* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`): `KubeletInUserNamespace`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

Enabling `KubeletInUsernamespace` feature gate does not automatically execute kubelet in a user namespace.
The user namespace has to be created by RootlessKit before running kubelet.
For `kind` usecase, the namespace is provided by Rootless Docker or Rootless Podman (they internally use RootlessKit).

Note that this feature gate does not support separating kubelet's user namespace from the user namespace of other
node components such as CRI.
All the node components has to run in the same user namespace.
```

So, basically there is no additional task, but we still have to modify a few lines of kubelet and kube-proxy to ignore
minor sysctl & rlimit errors. See ["Required changes to Kubernetes"](#required-changes-to-kubernetes).

It should be noted that [kind already works with unmodified Kubernetes](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/),
but kind currently uses [very dirty hack to mount fake files under `/proc/sys` to avoid hitting sysctl errors.](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kind/commit/85d51d898a5b642034e908d2869f0ad196c7d052#diff-3c55751d83af635109cece495ee2ff38206764a8b95f4cb8f11fc08a5c0ea8dcR105).

### Running Kubernetes directly on the host

> The node components need to be executed inside a user namespace along with other namespaces (mount namespace, network namespace, etc.)

Author: I'm talking about running all the node components such as kubelet, kube-proxy, CRI, and CNI in the same namespaces created by RootlessKit. I'm not talking about separating the namespaces of kubelet from other node components.

> The node components need to be executed inside a user namespace along with other namespaces (mount namespace, network namespace, etc.)

Author: Updated for clarity.

```md
* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`): `KubeletInUserNamespace`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

Enabling `KubeletInUsernamespace` feature gate does not automatically execute kubelet in a user namespace.
The user namespace has to be created by RootlessKit before running kubelet.
For `kind` usecase, the namespace is provided by Rootless Docker or Rootless Podman (they internally use RootlessKit).

Note that this feature gate does not support separating kubelet's user namespace from the user namespace of other
node components such as CRI.
All the node components has to run in the same user namespace.
```

* vEth with setuid binary `lxc-user-nic`

`slirp4netns` is preferred for security, `lxc-user-nic` is preferred for performance.

These stacks are used for the namespace where the node components are executed in, not for the containers' namespaces.
CNI plugins such as Flannel are expected to be used for the containers' namespace.

#### CNI plugins

Flannel (VXLAN) is known to work.

#### cgroup

[cgroup v2](../20191118-cgroups-v2.md) and systemd are required. cgroup v1 won't be supported due to security concerns.

containerd supports cgroup v2 for rootless mode since containerd v1.4.
[The master branch of CRI-O](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/commit/d3dbaec060e33870e5cb5c3f7ec4207837804b00) also supports cgroup v2 for rootless mode.
It will be included in CRI-O v1.22.

No code change is required on kubelet for managing cgroups, because we can use cgroup namespaces along with mount namespaces for creating writable `/sys/fs/cgroup` filesystem.

### Required changes to Kubernetes

Most things do work without modifying Kubernetes. But we need to modify a just few lines of kubelet and kube-proxy to ignore errors during setting some sysctl and rlimit values.

#### kubelet

> Patch: ["kubelet/cm: ignore sysctl error when running in userns"](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/blob/v20210303.0/src/patches/kubernetes/0001-kubelet-cm-ignore-sysctl-error-when-running-in-usern.patch)

Reviewer 5: i view this patch as similar to `--fail-swap-on` and so it seems fine to support further iteration in this space.

Author: Yes, thanks

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

#### Removing a Deprecated Flag

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include 
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md
-->

- Alpha: Basic support for rootless mode on cgroups v2 hosts.

> - Beta: e2e tests coverage.

Reviewer 5: to move to beta, we need clarity if we intend to define two separate types of conformance suites:

- kubernetes clusters that can run privileged workloads
- kubernetes cluster that are restricted to run unprivileged workloads only

absent that distinction i do not see how we proceed to beta or navigate the web of questions and caveats around what works, what doesnt, and what requires testing across the project and related sigs (node, storage, network, etc.)

Author: Updated
```md
- Beta: e2e tests coverage.
  Requires [the cgroup v2 KEP](../20191118-cgroups-v2.md ) to reach Beta or GA.
  To move to beta, we need clarity if we intend to define two separate types of conformance suites:
  - kubernetes clusters that can run privileged workloads
  - kubernetes cluster that are restricted to run unprivileged workloads only
 ```

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/20190731-production-readiness-review-process.md.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed for features in
v1.19 or later, but is non-blocking at this time. That is, approval is not
required in order to be in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**

>   - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 6: Please add the feature gate, as discussed.

Reviewer: Done! updated kep.yaml @ehashman

Reviewer 6: Needs to be added here in the doc too.

Author: Updated
```md
* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`): `KubeletInUserNamespace`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

Enabling `KubeletInUsernamespace` feature gate does not automatically execute kubelet in a user namespace.
The user namespace has to be created by RootlessKit before running kubelet.
For `kind` usecase, the namespace is provided by Rootless Docker or Rootless Podman (they internally use RootlessKit).

Note that this feature gate does not support separating kubelet's user namespace from the user namespace of other
node components such as CRI.
All the node components has to run in the same user namespace.
```

See ["Required changes to Kubernetes"](#required-changes-to-kubernetes).

Resources:
- POC: [Usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes)
- A presentation at KubeCon NA 2020: https://sched.co/fGWc
- Kubernetes PR: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/92863
- Rootless k3s: https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/blob/master/k3s-rootless.service
- kind with Rootless Docker/Rootless Podman: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/
  (It already works with unmodified Kubernetes, but contains dirty hack to fake procfs)
- Proposal in minikube repo, for running Kubernetes in Rootless Docker: https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube/issues/9495
- Proposal in minikube repo, for running Kubernetes in Rootless Podman: https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube/issues/8719

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

> * Protect the host from potential container-breakout vulnerabilities. This is the main movation.

Author: fixed

* Allow users of shared machines (especially HPC) to run Kubernetes without the risk of accidentally breaking their colleagues' environments.
  Not recommended for real multi-tenancy where the users cannot be trusted.
  * Safe [`kind`](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/): Kubernetes inside Rootless Docker/Podman.
  * Safe Kubernetes-on-Kubernetes, to isolate workloads more strictly than Kubernetes API namespaces.

### FAQ: why not use admission controllers?

> Admission controllers like PSP can restrict containers to use extra security options like AppArmor/SELinux, gVisor/Kata, and also potentially [Node-level UserNS](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/127) in future.

Author: fixed

However, these are not efficient to mitigate vulnerabilities of the node components themselves (kubelet, CRI, OCI...).

e.g.
- [CVE-2017-1002102](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2017-1002102): kubelet could delete files on the host during syncing secret/configMap/downwardAPI volumes
- [CVE-2019-11245](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2019-11245): Dockerfile USER instruction was ignored by kubelet
- [CVE-2018-11235](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2018-11235): kubelet could execute an arbitrary command as the root via gitRepo volumes
- Potential image extraction [zip-slip](https://snyk.io/research/zip-slip-vulnerability) vulnerabilities in CRI runtimes. Both containerd and CRI-O are working on implementing supports for new archive formats like zstd, imgcrypt, and stargz. Potentially these implementations have such vulnerabilities.
- And lots of CRI/OCI vulnerabilities in the past.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Allow `kubelet` and `kube-proxy` being executed inside user namespaces create by a non-root user. See ["Required changes to Kubernetes"](#required-changes-to-kubernetes).

Author: fixed

> - Allow `kubelet` and `kube-proxy` to be executed inside user namespaces create by a non-root user. See ["Required changes to Kubernetes"](#required-changes-to-kubernetes).

Reviewer 7: ... windows has these 'kernel silos' or something like that, need @jsturtevant to weigh in here, on what this would mean for hostProcess containers....

This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1: Production cluster

A user is scared of the past vulnerabilities of kubelet/CRI/OCI, and looking for a way to
mitigate such potential vulnerabilities.

So the user would want this KEP to be implemented.

The user may face difficulties for deploying stateful workloads because block-based and NFS-based persistent volumes
mostly do not work (see [Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats)), but this is not a huge deal,
when the user can use managed object storages such as Amazon S3, or managed RDBs such as Amazon RDS for storing persistent data.

If the user really needs to run an application that requires the root privileges, the user

> would create a mixed cluster composed of rootful nodes and rootless nodes, and set

Reviewer 8: Most CSI drivers basically require to run as root. FUSE is not a good option, as @msau42 linked above. Without root, users are left with a handful of CSI drivers that are hard to update.

the node selector to ensure the privileged pods to be scheduled on rootful nodes.

> However, it is more preferrable to create another cluster for rootful nodes.

Author: fixed

```yaml
conntrack:
# Skip setting sysctl value "net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_max"
  maxPerCore: 0
# Skip setting "net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_tcp_timeout_established"
  tcpEstablishedTimeout: 0s
# Skip setting "net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_tcp_timeout_close"
  tcpCloseWaitTimeout: 0s
```
- Some CNI plugins might not work. Flannel (VXLAN) is known to work.
- Limited network performance due to the slirp4netns overhead.
  **Mitigation:** Install [`lxc-user-nic` (SETUID binary)](https://github.com/rootless-containers/rootlesskit/blob/v0.14.2/docs/network.md#--netlxc-user-nic-experimental).
- NodePort less than 1024 cannot be exposed. This is not a problem with the default `--service-node-port-range` configuration (30000-32767).
  **Mitigation:** set `CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE` file capability on `rootlesskit` binary.

Volumes:
- Block device volumes and (kernel-mode) NFS does not work, because user namespace only supports `tmpfs`, `bind`, and FUSE filesystems.
  `emptyDir`, `hostPath`, `local`, and API volumes (`configMap`, `secret`, `downwardAPI`, ...) are known to work without any issue.

>   FUSE-based CSI volumes can be supported as well.

Reviewer 9: Can we elaborate on this one? Is the proxy going to shift the gids when doing mounts?

Author: Updated

```md
Volumes:
- Block device volumes and (kernel-mode) NFS does not work, because user namespace only supports `tmpfs`, `bind`, and FUSE filesystems.
  `emptyDir`, `hostPath`, `local`, and API volumes (`configMap`, `secret`, `downwardAPI`, ...) are known to work without any issue.
  FUSE-based CSI volumes can be supported, but not recommended.
  **Mitigation:** Use managed object storage services such as Amazon S3/Google Cloud Storage/Azure Blob Storage, or use managed database services for storing persistent data.
```

>   **Mitigation:** Implement CSI plugins for FUSE implementation of NFS. Or implement a "proxy" CSI plugin that talks to a privileged CSI plugin daemon.

Reviewer 9: how does local volumes work without rootless kubelet? on mount kubelet performs recursive chown/chmod of local volumes and I suspect that won't be allowed.

Author: chown/chmod can work, as long as enough numbers of subuid and subgid are configured for the current user.

> SecurityContext:

Reviewer 9: Is `SecurityContext.fsGroup` supported?

Author: Yes, it should work, as long as enough numbers of subuid and subgid are configured for the current user.

All Kubernetes components including CRI runtime, kubelet, kube-proxy, and CNI daemon need to be executed in RootlessKit's namespaces.
```console
$ rootlesskit --net=slirp4netns --copy-up=/etc --copy-up=/run --copy-up=/var --pidns --cgroupns --ipcns --utsns -- containerd &
$ nsenter -t $ROOTLESSKIT_CHILD_PID -a kubelet ... &
$ nsenter -t $ROOTLESSKIT_CHILD_PID -a kube-proxy ... &
$ nsenter -t $ROOTLESSKIT_CHILD_PID -a flanneld ... &
```

#### Paths

Some paths like `/var/log/pods` are hardcoded in Kubernetes and hard to change.

Although these directories are not writable by unprivileged users, Kubernetes does NOT need to be changed to use unprivileged home directories,
because RootlessKit can bind-mount writable directories on these paths without the root privileges. (`rootlesskit --copy-up=/var`)

#### Network
The node components need to be executed in RootlessKit's network namespace, because an unprivileged user cannot do privileged operations in the host network namespace.
As the components are executed inside a network namespace, `NodePorts` are not directly accessible from other hosts.

> An external controller should watch changes on `corev1.Service` resources and call [RootlessKit API](https://github.com/rootless-containers/rootlesskit/blob/v0.11.1/pkg/api/openapi.yaml) to set up port forwarding for the node ports.

Reviewer 10: I'm a little confused.  The goal is to run kube-proxy as non-root, but then that doesn't work, so you have something ELSE run as root and forward all the traffic?  That seems kind of pointless.  Am I missing something?  Looking at the impl of port-forwarding it seems to be a user-space implementation.

Author: No, the port forwarder is rootless too. This port forwarder is needed because kube-proxy cannot listen on ports outside the namespace.

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`): `KubeletInUserNamespace`
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

Enabling `KubeletInUsernamespace` feature gate does not automatically execute kubelet in a user namespace.
The user namespace has to be created by RootlessKit before running kubelet.
For `kind` usecase, the namespace is provided by Rootless Docker or Rootless Podman (they internally use RootlessKit).

Note that this feature gate does not support separating kubelet's user namespace from the user namespace of other
node components such as CRI.
All the node components must run in the same user namespace.

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**

During Alpha, we will document what workloads will work and what will not work.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**

N/A, as switching back rootless to rootful requires redeploying the kubelet, and vice versa.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

N/A.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**

> CI will run `kind` (Kubernetes in Docker) tests with Rootless Docker/Podman.

Reviewer 2: kind is not enough, it does too much magic, we should run it in real clusters

Reviewer 2: we should have at least one job in GCE for beta
